Definition of an opioid: Opioids, sometimes called narcotics, are a type of drug. They include strong prescription pain relievers, such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl, and tramadol. The illegal drug heroin is also an opioid. Some opioids are made from the opium plant, and others are synthetic (man-made). These drugs activate opioid receptors on nerve cells in the body and brain. Opioid pain relievers can be effective in treatment for relieving pain. However, regular use can lead to dependence, and misuse of opioid pain relievers can lead to addiction, overdose incidents and possibly, death

A doctor may give you a prescription opioid to reduce pain after you have had a major injury or surgery. You may get them if you have severe pain from health conditions like cancer. Some doctors prescribe them for chronic pain.

Opioids can cause side effects such as drowsiness, mental fog, nausea, and constipation. They may also cause slowed breathing, which can lead to overdose deaths

The number of drug overdose deaths decreased by 4% from 2017 to 2018, but the number of drug overdose deaths was still four times higher in 2018 than in 1999.1  Nearly 70% of the 67,367 deaths in 2018 involved an opioid. The number of drug overdose deaths decreased by 4% from 2017 to 2018, but the number of drug overdose deaths was still four times higher in 2018 than in 1999.1  Nearly 70% of the 67,367 deaths in 2018 involved an opioid.

Opioids are a class of drugs that include pain relievers available legally by prescription, the illegal drug heroin, and synthetic opioids such as fentanyl. These drugs activate opioid receptors on nerve cells in the body and brain. Opioid pain relievers can be effective in treatment for relieving pain. However, regular use can lead to dependence, and misuse of opioid pain relievers can lead to addiction, overdose incidents and possibly, death

Paralleling a rapid increase in rates of opioid pain reliever prescribing, which is now showing early signs of abating, widespread use and misuse of these medications led to an alarming rise in opioid overdose deaths(link is external), giving way to a nationwide crisis. Results from the 2018 National Survey on Drug Use and Health(link is external) showed that an estimated 1.2 million people in the United States aged 12 and older had an opioid use disorder, the most recent year for which data are available.

Chronic pain is a major public health problem that affects an estimated 100 million American adults, approximately one third of the U.S. population. It is the primary reason Americans are on disability and unable to work, and is a top reason cited for seeking medical care. Although opioids may not always be the best course of treatment for chronic pain, the number of prescriptions for opioid pain relievers has increased dramatically in recent years(link is external)

In 2017, more than 72,000 Americans died from drug overdoses, including illicit drugs and prescription opioids, a 2-fold increase in a decade. The sharpest increase involved synthetic opioids, primarily fentanyl and fentanyl analogs (similar compounds), with nearly 30,000 overdose deaths, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).1 Heroin was involved in nearly 16,000 deaths and prescription painkillers were involved in nearly 15,000 deaths.

Opioids are natural or synthetic (made in laboratories to mimic the properties of natural opioids) chemicals that interact with opioid receptors on the nerve cells in the body and brain and reduce feelings of pain. They are a class of drugs that include prescription pain relivers, synthetic opioids and heroin.

Opioid Use Disorder (OUD): a problematic pattern of opioid use that causes significant impairment or distress.

Methadone is a long-acting synthetic opioid agonist medication that can prevent withdrawal symptoms and reduce craving in opioid-addicted individuals. It can also block the effects of illicit opioids. It has a long history of use in treatment of opioid dependence in adults and is taken orally. Methadone maintenance treatment is available in all but three States through specially licensed opioid treatment programs or methadone maintenance programs.

Buprenorphine is a synthetic opioid medication that acts as a partial agonist at opioid receptors—it does not produce the euphoria and sedation caused by heroin or other opioids but is able to reduce or eliminate withdrawal symptoms associated with opioid dependence and carries a low risk of overdose.

Naltrexone is a synthetic opioid antagonist—it blocks opioids from binding to their receptors and thereby prevents their euphoric and other effects. It has been used for many years to reverse opioid overdose and is also approved for treating opioid addiction. The theory behind this treatment is that the repeated absence of the desired effects and the perceived futility of abusing opioids will gradually diminish craving and addiction. Naltrexone itself has no subjective effects following detoxification (that is, a person does not perceive any particular drug effect), it has no potential for abuse, and it is not addictive.

What are some symptoms of being addicted? Some symptoms of Opioid Use Disorder include Taking larger amounts or taking drugs over a longer period than intended. Persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control opioid use. Spending a great deal of time obtaining or using the opioid or recovering from its effects. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use opioids Problems fulfilling obligations at work, school or home. Continued opioid use despite having recurring social or interpersonal problems. Giving up or reducing activities because of opioid use. Using opioids in physically hazardous situations. Continued opioid use despite ongoing physical or psychological problem likely to have been caused or worsened by opioids. Tolerance (i.e., need for increased amounts or diminished effect with continued use of the same amount) Experiencing withdrawal (opioid withdrawal syndrome) or taking opioids (or a closely related substance) to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.

When it comes to prescribing opioids, the CDC has set up a guideline to help decide. The three main focus areas in the Prescription Guideline include 1. Determining when to initiate or continue opioids for chronic pain, such as Selection of non-pharmacologic therapy, nonopioid pharmacologic therapy, opioid therapy, Establishment of treatment goals, Discussion of risks and benefits of therapy with patients 2. Opioid selection, dosage, duration, follow-up, and discontinuation, such as Selection of immediate-release or extended-release and long-acting opioids, Dosage considerations, Duration of treatment, Considerations for follow-up and discontinuation of opioid therapy 3. Assessing risk and addressing harms of opioid use, such as Evaluation of risk factors for opioid-related harms and ways to mitigate patient risk, Review of prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP) data, Use of urine drug testing, Considerations for co-prescribing benzodiazepines, and Arrangement of treatment for opioid use disorder

Mixing alcohol and medicines can be harmful. Alcohol, like some medicines, can make you sleepy, drowsy, or lightheaded. Drinking alcohol while taking medicines can intensify these effects. You may have trouble concentrating or performing mechanical skills. Small amounts of alcohol can make it dangerous to drive, and when you mix alcohol with certain medicines you put yourself at even greater risk. Combining alcohol with some medicines can lead to falls and serious injuries, especially among older people.

What is Naloxone? Naloxone is an opioid antagonist, which means that it blocks opioid receptors from being activated. It is so strongly attracted to the receptors that it knocks other opioids off. When opioids are sitting on their receptors, they change the activity of the cell.

How do you use Naloxone? Naloxone is used in a few ways. In order to use it, there are home preparations of naloxone that include a nasal spray given to someone while they lie on their back or a device that automatically injects medicine into the thigh. Sometimes more than one dose is needed. The person’s breathing also needs to be monitored after you use a home preparation. If the person stops breathing, consider rescue breaths and CPR if you are trained until first responders arrive.
